docs: why ibis and other edits (#6976)
ibis-project/ibis: docs/why.qmd

---
title: "Why Ibis?"
---

Ibis is a portable Python dataframe library. If you've had issues with scaling data transformation code in Python, need to work with data in multiple data platforms, find yourself translating between other Python dataframe APIs, or just want a great Python dataframe experience, Ibis is for you.

## Portability

Ibis is portable -- that is, you can reuse the same code across multiple backends. Most Python dataframes are tightly coupled to their execution engine. And many databases only support SQL, with no Python API. Ibis solves this problem by providing a common API for data manipulation in Python, and compiling that API into the backend's native language. This means you can learn a single API and use it across any supported backend (execution engine).

![Present state](./present.png)

> While portability with Ibis isn't perfect, commonalaties across backends and SQL dialects combined with years of engineering effort product a pretty good result. In the long-term future, we hope for standard Intermediary Representation (IR) formats for compute to simplify this further.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While portability with Ibis isn't perfect, commonalities across backends and SQL dialects combined with years of engineering effort produce a pretty good result. In the long-term, we hope for standard Intermediate Representation (IR) formats for compute to simplify this further.
```

![Future state](./future.png)

## Ecosystem

Ibis is part of a larger ecosystem of Python data tools. Ibis is designed to work well with other tools in the ecosystem, and we hope to make it easier to use Ibis with other tools over time. 

### Local experience

By default, Ibis offers a great local experience for working with many file formats. DuckDB is the default backend, with Polars and DataFusion as two other great local options. Many of the backends can run locally but require more setup than a pip installation.

### Scaling up and out

> After prototyping on a local backend, some directly scale in the cloud. For instance, you can prototype on DuckDB and deploy with MotherDuck. You can scale from any Python client with Ibis installed to whatever your backend supports.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After prototyping on a local backend, directly scale in the cloud.You can prototype on DuckDB and deploy with MotherDuck. You can scale from any Python client with Ibis installed to whatever your backend supports.
```

The last sentence could use some massaging -- I don't think it will necessarily be clear to a user what their backend supports re: scaling
